{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2761
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPS-BoldMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue233;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c93333;}
\paperw11905\paperh16837\margl1440\margr1440\vieww28600\viewh15240\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs22 \cf0 This file (\'93CDSD_data.xlsx") was generated in 2025 by Mayank Kashyap and Rohit Kapila.\
\
\
GENERAL INFORMATION\
\
1. Title of Dataset: "\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc2 Resource Limitation Shapes the Evolution of Sexual Dimorphism and Condition Dependence in Drosophila melanogaster\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \ulnone "\
\
2. Author Information\
	A. Principal Investigator Contact Information\
Name: Prof. N. G. Prasad\
Institution: Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, Mohali\
Address: IISER Mohali, Sector 81, Knowledge City, SAS Nagar, Punjab \'96 140306, India.\
Email: prasad@iisermohali.ac.in \
\
	B. Associate or Co-investigator Contact Information\
\
Name: Rohit Kapila\
Institution: Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, Mohali; Florida International University, Miami\
Email: rohit.kapila.24@gmail.com, rkapila@fiu.edu\
\
Name: \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Mayank Kashyap \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
Institution: Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, Mohali; University of California Riverside\
Email: \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
mkash006@ucr.edu \
\
\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 Name: \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Muskan \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
Institution: Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, Mohali; \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
UMR 8198 \'96 Evo-Eco-Paleo, CNRS, Univ. Lille, Lille F-59000, France\
\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
Email: \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
muskaan.jal.99@gmail.com \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\
3. Duration of data collection: 2020-2021\
\
4. Geographic location of data collection: Mohali, Punjab, India \
\
5. Information about funding sources that supported the collection of the data: IISER Mohali, Govt. of India.\
\
\
#######SHARING/ACCESS INFORMATION\
 \
Links to publications that cite or use the data:  \
\
\
DATA & FILE OVERVIEW\
\
1. File List: \'93CDSD_data.xlsx"\
\
\
METHODOLOGICAL INFORMATION\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
We manipulated resource availability in eight laboratory populations \'96 four replicate populations called as \'a0Melanogaster Crowded as larvae, Uncrowded as adults (MCU) and other four are Melanogaster Baseline (MB) populations (Shenoi, Ali, et al., 2016). MCU populations, hereafter referred to as larval crowding-adapted, were derived from ancestral MB populations hereafter referred to as control populations. Each replicate of crowding-adapted population is derived from a baseline control population (i.e. MCU 1 was derived from MB 1 and so on). Each replicate of crowding-adapted population was since then maintained as a separate population. Hence, the crowding adapted populations that are connected to control population by the same replicate numbers are their direct descendants; therefore, they were treated as statistical blocks representing ancestry in analyses.\
\'a0\
\'a0\
\ul Standard maintenance protocol of control flies\ulnone \
All populations are maintained on a 21-day discrete generation cycle. Throughout their maintenance cycle, populations are maintained at a constant temperature of 25\'b0C and 90% RH. Eggs are collected on the 0\super th\nosupersub  day of population maintenance cycle. From every replicate block of control populations, eggs are collected and dispensed into 40 glass vials (25mm diameter x 90mm height) \'a0at a density of \'a060-70 eggs per vial containing 6-8 mL of food. Flies start eclosing on the 9\super th\nosupersub  day post egg collection. Eclosion peaks on the 10\super th\nosupersub  day and most adults eclose by the 12\super th\nosupersub  day. At this stage, the eclosed adults are transferred to Plexiglas cages (24 x 19 x14 cm) which contain a Petri plate of cornmeal- charcoal food and a wet cotton (to ensure a humid environment) both of which are replaced every alternate day. The adult populations are maintained at a size of 2500 adults per replicate population. On the 18\super th\nosupersub  day post egg collection, cornmeal-charcoal food plate is supplemented with yeast paste for two days. On the 20\super th\nosupersub  day, the charcoal cornmeal- yeast food plate is replaced with an egg-collection food plate for 18 hours. Eggs laid during these 18 hours are used to set up the next generation. \
\'a0\
\ul Standard maintenance protocol of larval crowding-adapted flies\ulnone \
Similar to control flies, larval crowding-adapted flies are maintained in discrete 21 days generation cycle at 25\'b0C and 90% RH. Eggs are collected on the 0\super th\nosupersub  day of population maintenance cycle. To induce larval crowding environment, eggs are dispensed into vials (25mm diameter x 90mm height) at a density of 800 eggs per vial containing 1.5 mL food. From each replicate population, 24 such vials are collected. Only about 100 of these 800 individuals survive till the adult stage. The final adult population size is maintained around the same density of 2400 flies per populations. In adult stage, similar to control populations larval crowding-adapted populations are maintained in an uncrowded environment in Plexiglass cages\'a0(24 x 19 x14 cm). Cages are provided with fresh Petri plate of cornmeal- charcoal food and a wet cotton every alternate day. Flies start eclosing from the 8\super th\nosupersub  day till the 18\super th\nosupersub  day post egg collection day and to avoid adult crowding, eclosed adults are transferred to cages every day during this period. Similar to control populations, on the 18\super th\nosupersub  day, crowding-adapted flies are given a cornmeal-charcoal food plate supplemented with yeast paste for two days, which is followed by an 18- hour period of oviposition plate. Eggs laid during these 18 hours are used to set up the next generation. \
\'a0\
\'a0\
\ul Experimental setup\ulnone \
To manipulate resource availability, we reared larvae from crowding-adapted and control populations of Drosophila melanogaster that had undergone ~250 generations of selection in their respective environments, across three different larval density treatments. The high-density (HD) treatment had 600 eggs per 2 mL of cornmeal food, intermediate-density (ID) had 300 eggs per 2 mL of cornmeal food and low-density (LD) had 60 eggs per 6 mL of cornmeal food. The HD treatment was set at 600 eggs per 2\uc0\u8239 ml of food, rather than 800 eggs per 1.5\u8239 ml, as the latter proved too extreme for control populations, often leading to population crashes. Egg collections for different selection regime and density treatments were done on different days to account for varying developmental rates as a response to larval crowding and adaptation, ensuring that on the day of experiment flies from all the treatments are of same adult age (Moya & Botella, 1985). \'a0Upon eclosion, high-density and intermediate-density flies from both selection regimes were transferred daily to Plexiglas cages (12*11*11 cm). Low-density flies from both selection regimes were transferred to Plexiglass cages on the 12\super th\nosupersub  day from egg-collection. This is a standard practice in larval crowding studies and ensure no resource limitation at the adult stage (Nagarajan et al., 2016; Sarangi et al., 2016; Shenoi, Banerjee, et al., 2016). Post transfer, flies from all treatments and selection regimes were given a 24-hour period to allow their cuticles to sclerotize. After the 24-hour period were frozen at -20 \'b0C and reserved for morphological measurements (Chechi et al., 2017).\
\'a0\
\ul Morphometric Data\ulnone \
\ul \'a0\ulnone \
From the frozen flies, 15 from each sex were randomly chosen from every selection regime X density treatment. The right foreleg and both wings were dissected from each fly under a dissection microscope using dissection forceps. These traits were measured because previous studies have demonstrated their sexual dimorphism in Drosophila melanogaster (Setoguchi et al., 2014; Siomava et al., 2016). Subsequently, these sparts were imaged using a digital camera attached with microscope. All the dissection were done in 1x PBS, on a glass slide under a compound microscope (Leica MC120HD, Leica Microsystems GmbH, Wetzlar, Germany) and was photographed at 40x zoom using the attached digital camera connected with Leica Stereo Zoom Microscope (M205C, Leica Microsystems GmbH, Wetzlar, Germany) Linear measurements of the following parts were obtained - femur, tibia, L3 vein length of the right wing , L3 vein length of the left wing and thorax\cf3 \ul \ulc3 [RK1]\cf2 \ulnone \'a0. \
\'a0\
\ul \ulc2 Image analysis\ulnone \
\'a0\
Image J version 1.50b (National Institute of Health) \'a0was used to perform all linear measurements. An image of a standard stage micrometre (1mm) glass slide served as a reference for each organ (for absolute length/pixels). For wing vein, a straight-line length from anterior cross vein to the end of the second longitudinal vein was used (Markow & Gottesman, 1994). Thorax length was measured from where the neck meets the pronotum to the posterior tip of the scutellum. Femur and tibia length was measured from severed right forelegs using a method similar to Shingleton et al., 2009. \
\'a0\
Statistical Analysis\
\'a0\
Since \'a0thorax, wing, femur and tibia length are proxies for body size, in order to estimate body size, we calculated principal components from our dataset. Principal Component 1 (PC1) accounted for over 80% of the total variation in the dataset and showed negative loadings for all measured body size traits (thorax, wing, femur, and tibia lengths), indicating that higher PC1 values correspond to smaller body sizes. We used linear mixed modelling approach using R Studio to test the effects of sex, treatment, selection and their interactions on composite body size (Principal component 1). \
Following model was selected based on AIC (Akaike, 1974) model selection criteria:\
\'a0\
PC1~ Sex*Selection*Treatment + (1|Block)\
\'a0\
Where sex, selection and treatment were modelled as fixed effects and block was modelled as a random effect. \
\'a0\
\ul Trait-wise analysis\ulnone \
\'a0\
Different traits that were measured in this study are all proxies for the same trait, i.e., body size. Therefore, all traits were corrected for body size by regressing composite body size with the trait. Residuals calculated from this regression would harbour unexplained variation due to body size and were used for trait-wise analyses. Similar linear mixed modelling approach as described for composite body size was used to test the effects of sex, selection, treatment and their interactions on individual traits. \
\'a0\
\'a0\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
DATA-SPECIFIC INFORMATION FOR \'93CDSD_data.xlsx"\
\
This file has one tab with 7 columns. Below, we provide details separately for each column.\
1. Number of variables: 7\
2. Number of cases/rows: 3601\
3. Variable List: \cf2 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf2 \ul ID\ulnone : Each entry in the `ID` column represents a **unique identifier** for an individual sample collected during the experiment. The ID codes follow a standardised naming convention that encodes metadata about the sample.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
**Format:** `WXYZ#`\
\
- `W` = **Selection regime**\
  - `M` = MB group  \
  - `C` = MCU group \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
- `X` = **Density treatment**\
  - `L` = Low density (LD)   \
  - `I` = Intermediate density (ID)\
  - `H` = High density (HD)\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2  \
- `Y` = **Sex**\
  - `f` = Female  \
  - `m` = Male\
\
- `Z` = **Body Region**\
  - `T` = Thorax  \
  - `LW` = Left Wing  \
  - `RW` = Right Wing  \
  - `F` = Femur  \
  - `Tb` = Tibia\
\
- `#` =  The trailing number (e.g., `1`, `2`, \'85\'85) is a **serial number** uniquely distinguishing individuals with similar metadata.\

\f0\b0 \
## Example Interpretations\
\
- `MLfT3` \uc0\u8594  MB, Low density, Female, Thorax, Sample #3  \
- `CHmRW9` \uc0\u8594  MCU, High density, Male, Right Wing, Sample #9  \
- `MIfTb12` \uc0\u8594  MB, Intermediate density, Female, Tibia, Sample #12\cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \ul Block: \ulnone 4 independent replicates of each selection regime; "1", "2", "3" or "4"\
\ul T/W/F\ulnone : Trait measure; \'92T= Thorax\'92, \'91LW/RW= Left-wing/Right-wing\'92, \'91F= Femur\'92 \
\ul Selection\ulnone : Selection regimes of flies used for the experiment. i.e. \'93MB\'94 and \'93MCU\'94 populations.\
\ul Treatment\ulnone : Larval density of flies used for the experiment, i.e. \'93High larval density\'94 and \'93Low larval density\'94.\
\ul Sex:\ulnone  Sex of the fly for which the data point was generated, i.e. \'93Male/Female\'94\
\ul Measurement\ulnone : Trait value measured.}